
## 3.5 Interpreters for Languages with Combination

The software running on any modern computer is written in a variety of programming languages. There are physical languages, such as the machine languages for particular computers. These languages are concerned with the representation of data and control in terms of individual bits of storage and primitive machine instructions. The machine-language programmer is concerned with using the given hardware to erect systems and utilities for the efficient implementation of resource-limited computations. High-level languages, erected on a machine-language substrate, hide concerns about the representation of data as collections of bits and the representation of programs as sequences of primitive instructions. These languages have means of combination and abstraction, such as procedure definition, that are appropriate to the larger-scale organization of software systems.

*Metalinguistic abstraction* -- establishing new languages -- plays an important role in all branches of engineering design. It is particularly important to computer programming, because in programming not only can we formulate new languages but we can also implement these languages by constructing interpreters. An interpreter for a programming language is a function that, when applied to an expression of the language, performs the actions required to evaluate that expression.

We now embark on a tour of the technology by which languages are established in terms of other languages. We will first define an interpreter for a limited language called Calculator that shares the syntax of Python call expressions. We will then develop a sketch interpreters for the Scheme and Logo languages, which is are dialects of Lisp, the second oldest language still in widespread use today. The interpreter we create will be complete in the sense that it will allow us to write fully general programs in Logo. To do so, it will implement the environment model of evaluation that we have developed over the course of this text.

### 3.5.1 Calculator

Our first new language is Calculator, an expression language for the arithmetic operations of addition, subtraction, multiplication, and division. Calculator shares Python's call expression syntax, but its operators are more flexible in the number of arguments they accept. For instance, the Calculator operators `add` and `mul` take an arbitrary number of arguments:

```
calc> add(1, 2, 3, 4)
10
calc> mul()
1
```

The `sub` operator has two behaviors. With one argument, it negates the argument. With at least two arguments, it subtracts all but the first from the first. The `div` operator has the semantics of Python's `operator.truediv` function and takes exactly two arguments:

```
calc> sub(10, 1, 2, 3)
4
calc> sub(3)
-3
calc> div(15, 12)
1.25
```

As in Python, call expression nesting provides a means of combination in the Calculator language. To condense notation, the names of operators can also be replaced by their standard symbols:

```
calc> sub(100, mul(7, add(8, div(-12, -3))))
16.0
calc> -(100, *(7, +(8, /(-12, -3))))
16.0
```

We will implement an interpreter for Calculator in Python. That is, we will write a Python program that takes a string as input and either returns the result of evaluating that string if it is a well-formed Calculator expression or raises an appropriate exception if it is not. The core of the interpreter for the Calculator language is a recursive function called `calc_eval` that evaluates a tree-structured expression object.

**Expression trees.** Until this point in the course, expression trees have been conceptual entities to which we have referred in describing the process of evaluation; we have never before explicitly represented expression trees as data in our programs. In order to write an interpreter, we must operate on expressions as data. In the course of this chapter, many of the concepts introduced in previous chapters will finally by realized in code.

A primitive expression is just a number in Calculator, either an `int` or `float` type. All combined expressions are call expressions. A call expression is represented as a class `Exp` that has two attribute instances. The `operator` in Calculator is always a string: an arithmetic operator name or symbol. The `operands` are either primitive expressions or themselves instances of `Exp`.

```
>>> class Exp(object):
        """A call expression in Calculator."""
        def __init__(self, operator, operands):
            self.operator = operator
            self.operands = operands
        def __repr__(self):
            return 'Exp({0}, {1})'.format(repr(self.operator), repr(self.operands))
        def __str__(self):
            operand_strs = ', '.join(map(str, self.operands))
            return '{0}({1})'.format(self.operator, operand_strs)
```

An `Exp` instance defines two string methods. The `__repr__` method returns Python expression, while the `__str__` method returns a Calculator expression.

```
>>> Exp('add', [1, 2])
Exp('add', [1, 2])
>>> str(Exp('add', [1, 2]))
'add(1, 2)'
>>> Exp('add', [1, Exp('mul', [2, 3, 4])])
Exp('add', [1, Exp('mul', [2, 3, 4])])
>>> str(Exp('add', [1, Exp('mul', [2, 3, 4])]))
'add(1, mul(2, 3, 4))'
```

This final example demonstrates how the `Exp` class represents the hierarchical structure in expression trees by including instances of `Exp` as elements of `operands`.

**Evaluation.** The `calc_eval` function itself takes an expression as an argument and returns its value. It classifies the expression by its form and directs its evaluation. For Calculator, the only two syntactic forms of expressions are numbers and call expressions, which are `Exp` instances. Numbers are *self-evaluating*; they can be returned directly from `calc_eval`. Call expressions require function application.

```
>>> def calc_eval(exp):
        """Evaluate a Calculator expression."""
        if type(exp) in (int, float):
            return exp
        elif type(exp) == Exp:
            arguments = list(map(calc_eval, exp.operands))
            return calc_apply(exp.operator, arguments)
```

Call expressions are evaluated by first recursively mapping the `calc_eval` function to the list of operands to compute a list of `arguments`. Then, the operator is applied to those arguments in a second function, `calc_apply`.

The Calculator language is simple enough that we can easily express the logic of applying each operator in the body of a single function. In `calc_apply`, each conditional clause corresponds to applying one operator.

```
>>> from operator import mul
>>> from functools import reduce
>>> def calc_apply(operator, args):
        """Apply the named operator to a list of args."""
        if operator in ('add', '+'):
            return sum(args)
        if operator in ('sub', '-'):
            if len(args) == 0:
                raise TypeError(operator + ' requires at least 1 argument')
            if len(args) == 1:
                return -args[0]
            return sum(args[:1] + [-arg for arg in args[1:]])
        if operator in ('mul', '*'):
            return reduce(mul, args, 1)
        if operator in ('div', '/'):
            if len(args) != 2:
                raise TypeError(operator + ' requires exactly 2 arguments')
            numer, denom = args
            return numer/denom
```

Above, each suite computes the result of a different operator, or raises an appropriate `TypeError` when the wrong number of arguments is given. The `calc_apply` function can be applied directly, but it must be passed a list of *values* as arguments rather than a list of operand expressions.

```
>>> calc_apply('+', [1, 2, 3])
6
>>> calc_apply('-', [10, 1, 2, 3])
4
>>> calc_apply('*', [])
1
>>> calc_apply('/', [40, 5])
8.0
```

The role of `calc_eval` is to make proper calls to `calc_apply` by first computing the value of operand sub-expressions before passing them as arguments to `calc_apply`. Thus, `calc_eval` can accept a nested expression.

```
>>> e = Exp('add', [2, Exp('mul', [4, 6])])
>>> str(e)
'add(2, mul(4, 6))'
>>> calc_eval(e)
26
```

The structure of `calc_eval` is an example of dispatching on type: the form of the expression. The first form of expression is a number, which requires no additional evaluation step. In general, primitive expressions that do not require an additional evaluation step are called *self-evaluating*. The only self-evaluating expressions in our Calculator language are numbers, but a general programming language might also include strings, boolean values, etc.

**Read-eval-print loops.** A typical approach to interacting with an interpreter is through a read-eval-print loop, or REPL, which is a mode of interaction that reads an expression, evaluates it, and prints the result for the user. The Python interactive session is an example of such a loop.

An implementation of a REPL can be largely independent of the interpreter it uses. The function `read_eval_print_loop` below takes as input a line of text from the user with the built-in `input` function. It constructs an expression tree using the language-specific `calc_parse` function, defined in the following section on parsing. Finally, it prints the result of applying `calc_eval` to the expression tree returned by `calc_parse`.

```
>>> def read_eval_print_loop():
        """Run a read-eval-print loop for calculator."""
        while True:
            expression_tree = calc_parse(input('calc> '))
            print(calc_eval(expression_tree))
```

This version of `read_eval_print_loop` contains all of the essential components of an interactive interface. An example session would look like:

```
calc> mul(1, 2, 3)
6
calc> add()
0
calc> add(2, div(4, 8))
2.5
```

This loop implementation has no mechanism for termination or error handling. We can improve the interface by reporting errors to the user. We can also allow the user to exit the loop by signalling a keyboard interrupt (`Control-C` on UNIX) or end-of-file exception (`Control-D` on UNIX). To enable these improvements, we place the original suite of the `while` statement within a `try` statement. The first `except` clause handles `SyntaxError` exceptions raised by `calc_parse` as well as `TypeError` and `ZeroDivisionError` exceptions raised by `calc_eval`.

```
>>> def read_eval_print_loop():
        """Run a read-eval-print loop for calculator."""
        while True:
            try:
                expression_tree = calc_parse(input('calc> '))
                print(calc_eval(expression_tree))
            except (SyntaxError, TypeError, ZeroDivisionError) as err:
                print(type(err).__name__ + ':', err)
            except (KeyboardInterrupt, EOFError):  # <Control>-D, etc.
                print('Calculation completed.')
                return
```

This loop implementation reports errors without exiting the loop. Rather than exiting the program on an error, restarting the loop after an error message lets users revise their expressions. Upon importing the `readline` module, users can even recall their previous inputs using the up arrow or `Control-P`. The final result provides an informative error reporting interface:

```
calc> add
SyntaxError: expected ( after add
calc> div(5)
TypeError: div requires exactly 2 arguments
calc> div(1, 0)
ZeroDivisionError: division by zero
calc> ^DCalculation completed.
```

As we generalize our interpreter to new languages other than Calculator, we will see that the `read_eval_print_loop` is parameterized by a parse function, an evaluation function, and the exception types handled by the `try` statement. Beyond these changes, all REPLs can be implemented using the same structure.

### 3.5.2 Parsing

Parsing is the process of generating expression trees from raw text input. It is the job of the evaluation function to interpret those expression trees, but the parser must supply well-formed expression trees to the evaluator. A parser is in fact a composition of two components: a lexical analyzer and a syntactic analyzer. First, the lexical analyzer partitions the input string into *tokens*, which are the minimal syntactic units of the language, such as names and symbols. Second, the syntactic analyzer constructs an expression tree from this sequence of tokens.

```
>>> def calc_parse(line):
        """Parse a line of calculator input and return an expression tree."""
        tokens = tokenize(line)
        expression_tree = analyze(tokens)
        if len(tokens) > 0:
            raise SyntaxError('Extra token(s): ' + ' '.join(tokens))
        return expression_tree
```

The sequence of tokens produced by the lexical analyzer, called `tokenize`, is consumed by the syntactic analyzer, called `analyze`. In this case, we define `calc_parse` to expect only one well-formed Calculator expression. Parsers for some languages are designed to accept multiple expressions delimited by new line characters, semicolons, or even spaces. We defer this additional complexity until we introduce the Logo language below.

**Lexical analysis.** The component that interprets a string as a token sequence is called a *tokenizer* or *lexical analyzer*. In our implementation, the tokenizer is a function called `tokenize`. The Calculator language consists of symbols that include numbers, operator names, and operator symbols, such as `+`. These symbols are always separated by two types of delimiters: commas and parentheses. Each symbol is its own token, as is each comma and parenthesis. Tokens can be separated by adding spaces to the input string and then splitting the string at each space.

```
>>> def tokenize(line):
        """Convert a string into a list of tokens."""
        spaced = line.replace('(',' ( ').replace(')',' ) ').replace(',', ' , ')
        return spaced.split()
```

Tokenizing a well-formed Calculator expression keeps names intact, but separates all symbols and delimiters.

```
>>> tokenize('add(2, mul(4, 6))')
['add', '(', '2', ',', 'mul', '(', '4', ',', '6', ')', ')']
```

Languages with a more complicated syntax may require a more sophisticated tokenizer. In particular, many tokenizers resolve the syntactic type of each token returned. For example, the type of a token in Calculator may be an operator, a name, a number, or a delimiter. This classification can simplify the process of *parsing* the token sequence.

**Syntactic analysis.** The component that interprets a token sequence as an expression tree is called a *syntactic analyzer*. In our implementation, syntactic analysis is performed by a recursive function called `analyze`. It is recursive because analyzing a sequence of tokens often involves analyzing a subsequence of those tokens into an expression tree, which itself serves as a branch (i.e., operand) of a larger expression tree. Recursion generates the hierarchical structures consumed by the evaluator.

The `analyze` function expects a list of tokens that begins with a well-formed expression. It analyzes the first token, coercing strings that represent numbers into numeric values. It then must consider the two legal expression types in the Calculator language. Numeric tokens are themselves complete, primitive expression trees. Combined expressions begin with an operator and follow with a list of operand expressions delimited by parentheses. Operands are analyzed by the `analyze_operands` function, which recursively calls `analyze` on each operand expression. We begin with an implementation that does not check for syntax errors.

```
>>> def analyze(tokens):
        """Create a tree of nested lists from a sequence of tokens."""
        token = analyze_token(tokens.pop(0))
        if type(token) in (int, float):
            return token
        else:
            tokens.pop(0)  # Remove (
            return Exp(token, analyze_operands(tokens))
>>> def analyze_operands(tokens):
        """Read a list of comma-separated operands."""
        operands = []
        while tokens[0] != ')':
            if operands:
                tokens.pop(0)  # Remove ,
            operands.append(analyze(tokens))
        tokens.pop(0)  # Remove )
        return operands
```

Finally, we need to implement `analyze_token`. The `analyze_token` function that converts number literals into numbers. Rather than implementing this logic ourselves, we rely on built-in Python type coercion, using the `int` and `float` constructors to convert tokens to those types.

```
>>> def analyze_token(token):
        """Return the value of token if it can be analyzed as a number, or token."""
        try:
            return int(token)
        except (TypeError, ValueError):
            try:
                return float(token)
            except (TypeError, ValueError):
                return token
```

Our implementation of `analyze` is complete; it correctly parses well-formed Calculator expressions into expression trees. These trees can be converted back into Calculator expressions by the `str` function.

```
>>> expression = 'add(2, mul(4, 6))'
>>> analyze(tokenize(expression))
Exp('add', [2, Exp('mul', [4, 6])])
>>> str(analyze(tokenize(expression)))
'add(2, mul(4, 6))'
```

The `analyze` function is meant to return only well-formed expression trees, and so it must detect errors in the syntax of its input. In particular, it must detect that expressions are complete, correctly delimited, and use only known operators. The following revisions ensure that each step of the syntactic analysis finds the token it expects.

```
>>> known_operators = ['add', 'sub', 'mul', 'div', '+', '-', '*', '/']
>>> def analyze(tokens):
        """Create a tree of nested lists from a sequence of tokens."""
        assert_non_empty(tokens)
        token = analyze_token(tokens.pop(0))
        if type(token) in (int, float):
            return token
        if token in known_operators:
            if len(tokens) == 0 or tokens.pop(0) != '(':
                raise SyntaxError('expected ( after ' + token)
            return Exp(token, analyze_operands(tokens))
        else:
            raise SyntaxError('unexpected ' + token)
>>> def analyze_operands(tokens):
        """Analyze a sequence of comma-separated operands."""
        assert_non_empty(tokens)
        operands = []
        while tokens[0] != ')':
            if operands and tokens.pop(0) != ',':
                raise SyntaxError('expected ,')
            operands.append(analyze(tokens))
            assert_non_empty(tokens)
        tokens.pop(0)  # Remove )
        return elements
>>> def assert_non_empty(tokens):
        """Raise an exception if tokens is empty."""
        if len(tokens) == 0:
            raise SyntaxError('unexpected end of line')
```

Informative syntax errors improve the usability of an interpreter substantially. Above, the `SyntaxError` exceptions that are raised include a description of the problem encountered. These error strings also serve to document the definitions of these analysis functions.

This definition completes our Calculator interpreter. A single Python 3 source file [calc.py](https://wizardforcel.gitbooks.io/sicp-in-python/content/calc.py) is available for your experimentation. Our interpreter is robust to errors, in the sense that every input that a user enters at the `calc>` prompt will either be evaluated to a number or raise an appropriate error that describes why the input is not a well-formed Calculator expression.