
# Chapter 5: Sequences and Coroutines

## 5.1 Introduction

In this chapter, we continue our discussion of real-world applications by developing new tools to process sequential data. In Chapter 2, we introduced a sequence interface, implemented in Python by built-in data types such as `tuple` and `list`. Sequences supported two operations: querying their length and accessing an element by index. In Chapter 3, we developed a user-defined implementations of the sequence interface, the `Rlist` class for representing recursive lists. These sequence types proved effective for representing and accessing a wide variety of sequential datasets.

However, representing sequential data using the sequence abstraction has two important limitations. The first is that a sequence of length *n* typically takes up an amount of memory proportional to *n*. Therefore, the longer a sequence is, the more memory it takes to represent it.

The second limitation of sequences is that sequences can only represent datasets of known, finite length. Many sequential collections that we may want to represent do not have a well-defined length, and some are even infinite. Two mathematical examples of infinite sequences are the positive integers and the Fibonacci numbers. Sequential data sets of unbounded length also appear in other computational domains. For instance, the sequence of all Twitter posts grows longer with every second and therefore does not have a fixed length. Likewise, the sequence of telephone calls sent through a cell tower, the sequence of mouse movements made by a computer user, and the sequence of acceleration measurements from sensors on an aircraft all extend without bound as the world evolves.

In this chapter, we introduce new constructs for working with sequential data that are designed to accommodate collections of unknown or unbounded length, while using limited memory. We also discuss how these tools can be used with a programming construct called a coroutine to create efficient, modular data processing pipelines.